lvi ι mrnonucrmu.

only other commentary there seems to be any occasion
to offer on the matter is, that, however unexpected it
may seem, at first sight, that such a donation, accom-
panied by such a grant, should have been made to
Rievaulx at such a very early date in the period of its
own existence, still a good deal of the aspect of strange-
ness will be removed by the recollection that none of
these things were done in a corner. The pioneer colony
of Cistercian monks, “ directed by St. Bernard‚'' had
been in the country now for five or six years. The
mission would be known, the arrival heard of, wherever
there was not merely a zeal for the great and holy work
like unto Espec’s, but wherever there was a latent
desire, a nascent disposition to engage in the same in
the hundreds of places calling for an exertion of the
like missionary efforts. And then, I think, we may
allow a little for the motive involved in the more
modern phrase that it was “ becoming the fashion '’ to
build monasteries It seems simply impossible to doubt
that King Olaf must have heard of what St. Bernard
was doing for North England in general, and at Walter
Espec’s instance in particular; and then, what more
natural than that he should apply for the aid he wanted
at what would, to him, of necessity, appear to be the
fountain-head ’ἔ

The other instance of the same kind adverted to a
little above, is thus introduced by Mr. Walbran in his
paper on Kirkham, already spoken of (and more than
once) in the course of the present remarks :——·“ The
motive,” he says, “ of the meditated surrender of their
house and property by the canons of Kirkham to the

